# Discrete math, continued / binary trees

## Relations

  - A relation is a subset of a Cartesian product: R ⊆ A × B
      - E.g., (≤) ⊆ ℤ × ℤ or InCourse ⊆ Students × Courses

Properties:

  - reflexivity: (x, x) ∈ R
      - (≤), InCourse
  - symmetry: if (x, y) ∈ R then (y, x) ∈ R
      - InCourse
  - transitivity: if (x, y) ∈ R and (y, z) ∈ R then (x, z) ∈ R
      - (≤)

### Equivalence relations

An *equivalence relation* is a relation that is reflexive, symmetric,
and transitive.

Example:

  - Consider (~) ⊆ ℤ × ℤ such that x ~ y iff x % 3 = y % 3
      - for any integer x, x % 3 = x % 3? yes!
      - for any integers x and y, if x % 3 = y % 3 then y % 3 = x % 3? yes!
      - for x, y, z ∈ Z, if x % 3 = y % 3 and y % 3 = z % 3, then x % 3 = z % 3

      - (~) partitions ℤ into three *equivalence classes*:
          - [0] = { x ∈ ℤ : x % 3 = 0 }
          - [1] = { x ∈ ℤ : x % 3 = 1 }
          - [2] = { x ∈ ℤ : x % 3 = 2 }

          - [1] + [1] = [2]
          - [2] + [2] = [1]

## Functions

### Definition

A binary relation R is a *function* if x R y and x R z means that y = z.

  - R = (≤) -- not a function
  - R = { (x, y) : x + y = 12 } -- a function!
      - f(x) = 12 - x
  - R = { (x, y) : (x + y) % 128 = 12 } -- not a function

When we have a function f ⊆ A × B, we write f: A → B
  - domain: A = dom f
  - codomain: B = cod f

### Function properties

  - *one-to-one* (a/k/a *injectivity*) if f(x) = f(y) then x = y
  - *onto* (a/k/a *surjectivity*) ∀ y ∈ cod f, ∃ x ∈ dom f s.t. f(x) = y
  - *bijective* = injective and surjective

Examples:

ℤ is the integers; ℝ is the reals; ℚ is the rationals; ℕ is the naturals.

  - f: ℤ → ℝ where f(x) = x + 0.5
      - injective
      - not surjective; counterexample: ¬∃ x ∈ ℤ s.t. f(x) = 6.6
      - not bijective

  - g: ℝ → ℤ where g(x) = the largest integer z s.t. z ≤ x
      - not injective; counterexample: g(3.1) = 3 = g(3.2)
      - surjective; ∀ y ∈ Z, f(y + 0.3) = y
      - not bijective

  - h: ℝ → ℝ where h(x) = 2x + 5
      - injective
      - surjective; given y ∈ ℝ, let x be (y - 5)/2. then h(x) = y.
      - bijective

Bijections are invertible. Choose some y; you know there's some x that
maps to y (by surjectivity), and that’s the *only* x that maps to y (by
injectivity).

A bijection pairs elements of sets.

## Graphs

### Definition

A *graph* is a set V (vertices), and binary relation E ⊆ V × V (edges).

  - For an *undirected graph*, E is symmetric.
  - For a *directed graph*, maybe not.

When people say *graph* they usually mean undirected.

### Graph concepts

Given a graph G = (V, E).

  - (V', E') is a *subgraph* of G if V' ⊆ V and E' ⊆ E

  - Two vertices x and y are adjacent if (x, y) ∈ E

  - A *path* from x to y is a sequence of vertices x, v1, v2, ..., vn, y
    such that:
      - Each vertex is adjacent to the next:
        (x, v1), (v1, v2), ..., (vn, y) ∈ E
      - No vertex repeats

  - G is *connected* if there's a path between every pair of vertices.

  - A *cycle* is a path from a vertex back to itself.

  - A graph is *cyclic* if it has any cycles.

## Trees

A *forest* is a non-cyclic graph.

A *tree* is a connected forest.

  - In a *forest*, there is *at most* one path between any pair of vertices.

  - In a *tree*, there is *exactly* one path between any pair of vertices.

